Enhance Integrations What's New in 9.1 (#2657)
dotnet/docs-aspire: docs/whats-new/dotnet-aspire-9.1.md

.NET Aspire thrives on [its integrations](../fundamentals/integrations-overview.md) with other platforms. This release has numerous updates to existing integrations, and details about migrations of ownership.

### Azure updates

This release also focused on improving various [Azure integrations](../azure/integrations-overview.md):

#### New emulators

We're very excited to bring new emulators for making local development much easier. The following integrations got new emulators in this release:

- [Azure Service Bus](../messaging/azure-service-bus-integration.md#add-azure-service-bus-emulator-resource)

> - [Azure Cosmos DB Linux-based (preview)](../database/includes/cosmos-app-host.md#use-linux-based-emulator-preview)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Azure Cosmos DB Linux-based (preview)](../database/azure-cosmos-db-integration.md#use-linux-based-emulator-preview)
```

- [Azure SignalR](/azure/azure-signalr/signalr-howto-emulator)

These new emulators work side-by-side with the existing emulators for:

- [Azure Storage](../storage/azure-storage-integrations.md)
- [Azure EventHubs](../messaging/azure-event-hubs-integration.md#add-azure-event-hubs-emulator-resource)

> - [Azure Cosmos DB](../database/includes/cosmos-app-host.md#add-azure-cosmos-db-emulator-resource)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Azure Cosmos DB](../database/azure-cosmos-db-integration.md#add-azure-cosmos-db-emulator-resource)
```

#### Cosmos DB

Along with support for the new emulator, Cosmos DB added the following features.

##### Support for Entra ID authentication by default

Previously, the Cosmos DB integration used access keys and a Key Vault secret to connect to the service. .NET Aspire 9.1 added support for using more secure authentication using managed identities by default. If you need to keep using access key authentication, you can get back to the previous behavior by calling `.WithAccessKeyAuthentication()`.

##### Support for modeling Database and Containers in the AppHost

You can define CosmosDB database and containers in the AppHost and these resources will be available when you run the application in both the emulator and in Azure. This allows you to define these resources up front and no longer need to create them from the application, which may not have permission to create them.

> ##### Support for CosmosDB-based triggers in Azure Functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Support for Cosmos DB-based triggers in Azure Functions
```

> The CosmosDB resource has been modifed to support consumption in Azure Functions applications that uses the CosmosDB trigger. A CosmosDB resource can be inititalized and added as a reference to an Azure Functions resource with the following code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cosmos DB resource has been modified to support consumption in Azure Functions applications that uses the Cosmos DB trigger. A Cosmos DB resource can be initialized and added as a reference to an Azure Functions resource with the following code:
```

```csharp
var cosmosDb = builder.AddAzureCosmosDB("cosmosdb")
                      .RunAsEmulator();
var database = cosmosDb.AddCosmosDatabase("mydatabase");
database.AddContainer("mycontainer", "/id");

var funcApp = builder.AddAzureFunctionsProject<Projects.AzureFunctionsEndToEnd_Functions>("funcapp")
  .WithReference(cosmosDb).WaitFor(cosmosDb);
```

The resource can be used in the Azure Functions trigger as follows:

```csharp
public class MyCosmosDbTrigger(ILogger<MyCosmosDbTrigger> logger)
{
    [Function(nameof(MyCosmosDbTrigger))]
    public void Run([CosmosDBTrigger(
        databaseName: "mydatabase",
        containerName: "mycontainer",
        CreateLeaseContainerIfNotExists = true,
        Connection = "cosmosdb")] IReadOnlyList<Document> input)
    {
        logger.LogInformation("C# cosmosdb trigger function processed: {Count} messages", input.Count);
    }
}
```

#### Service Bus and Event Hubs

> Similar to Cosmos DB above, the Service Bus and Event Hubs integrations allow you to model Azure Service Bus queues, topics, and subscriptions, and Azure Event Hubs hub instances and consumer groups in AppHost code. These resources can now be created outside of the applications that use them, simplifying app logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to Cosmos DB, the Service Bus and Event Hubs integrations allow you to model Azure Service Bus queues, topics, and subscriptions, and Azure Event Hubs hub instances and consumer groups in app host code. These resources can now be created outside of the applications that use them, simplifying app logic.
```

- [Azure Storage](../storage/azure-storage-integrations.md)
- [Azure EventHubs](../messaging/azure-event-hubs-integration.md#add-azure-event-hubs-emulator-resource)
- [Azure Cosmos DB](../database/includes/cosmos-app-host.md#add-azure-cosmos-db-emulator-resource)

#### Cosmos DB

Along with support for the new emulator, Cosmos DB added the following features.

##### Support for Entra ID authentication by default

Previously, the Cosmos DB integration used access keys and a Key Vault secret to connect to the service. .NET Aspire 9.1 added support for using more secure authentication using managed identities by default. If you need to keep using access key authentication, you can get back to the previous behavior by calling `.WithAccessKeyAuthentication()`.

##### Support for modeling Database and Containers in the AppHost

You can define CosmosDB database and containers in the AppHost and these resources will be available when you run the application in both the emulator and in Azure. This allows you to define these resources up front and no longer need to create them from the application, which may not have permissions to create them.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add the following? I trried to do it as a suggestion but GitHub isn't a fan of the nested codefences.

<hr/>

##### Support for CosmosDB-based triggers in Azure Functions

The CosmosDB resource has been modifed to support consumption in Azure Functions applications that uses the CosmosDB trigger. A CosmosDB resource can be inititalized and added as a reference to an Azure Functions resource with the following code:

```csharp
 var cosmosDb = builder.AddAzureCosmosDB("cosmosdb")
    .RunAsEmulator();
var database = cosmosDb.AddCosmosDatabase("mydatabase");
database.AddContainer("mycontainer", "/id");

var funcApp = builder.AddAzureFunctionsProject<Projects.AzureFunctionsEndToEnd_Functions>("funcapp")
  .WithReference(cosmosDb).WaitFor(cosmosDb);
```

The resource can be used in the Azure Functions trigger as follows:

```csharp
public class MyCosmosDbTrigger(ILogger<MyCosmosDbTrigger> logger)
{
    [Function(nameof(MyCosmosDbTrigger))]
    public void Run([CosmosDBTrigger(
        databaseName: "mydatabase",
        containerName: "mycontainer",
        CreateLeaseContainerIfNotExists = true,
        Connection = "cosmosdb")] IReadOnlyList<Document> input)
    {
        logger.LogInformation("C# cosmosdb trigger function processed: {Count} messages", input.Count);
    }
}
```

Author: Done
